[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>DR. SUE MORTER:
Dr. Shamini Jain
belongs to a new
generation of scientists
who are turning their
focus from curing disease
to healing the whole body.
Shamini is a
psychologist, scientist,
and social entrepreneur,
and her work
has been featured in TIME,
US News and World Report,
and on CNN.
Currently she is the president
and CEO of the Consciousness
and Healing Initiative.
Welcome, Shamini.
I'm so glad that
you're here with us.
>>SHAMINI JAIN: Thank you, Sue.
It's an honor.
>>SUE: Can you just give us a--
I know that a deep
tradition of such
is very difficult to encapsulate
in a sentence or two.
But just to allow our viewers
to have a solid understanding
of what Jainism is
and how it differs
from other forms of spiritual
study, Hinduism or Buddhism,
et cetera.
>>JAIN: Absolutely.
I would be happy to.
So Jainism is a
very small religion.
People don't really
convert to it.
It's not a proselytizing
type of religion.
Some would even call it more
of a philosophy than a religion
because it doesn't really hold--
it's not really meant
to worship creator gods,
although there is
an acknowledgment
that heavenly beings exist.
We don't necessarily
pray to them.
We really pray for
spiritual liberation,
and that is the liberation
of the soul in its entirety,
to experience what we might
call god consciousness.
So that's similar in
some ways to Vedanta,
to the Upanishadic
teachings, to Buddhism.
Well, one of the hallmarks for
Jainism that it's known for
is its strong principle
in nonviolence
as a path toward liberation.
So much also like
Vedanta and Buddhism,
we talk about the patterns
of attachment, avoidance,
and ignorance as ways that we
cloud our soul literally with
karma-- and Jains very
much believe in karma--
that we cloud our soul by
engaging in attachment,
avoidance, and ignorance.
But the practice of nonviolence
helps us to really clear
those patterns from our soul.
We also believe in principles
like [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],,
which could really be
translated into the principle
of sufficiency really,
and [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],,
which is non-absolutism,
the truth of no truth,
the truth of no absolute truth,
the truth that all spiritual
practices lead to
the same place.
And so your truth is
as valid as my truth.
>>SUE: Now, we parlay that
into psychoneuroimmunology.
Can you say just a
little bit about that
so that everyone's on the
same page as we dive in today?
>>JAIN: Imagine that 40
years ago in medicine
if you said the emotions
affect the body,
you would have been
completely laughed at.
Not only that, if
you said the brain is
connected to the immune system,
you would have been laughed at.
And people were.
So when the people--
>>SUE: I was one
of those people.
My father was one
So I get it.
>>JAIN: Yeah, so you know
it really well, right?
And so there were
the practitioners
that were saying this from a
very deep level of experience
and work with patients.
And then there were scientists
that were saying this
because they were
discovering these connections
in their work, and when
they would present that data
to their colleagues, they were
just completely laughed at.
So they had to really seek
out collaborations and
transdisciplinary
dialogues with people.
For example, you had
people in neuroscience
that were starting to talk
with people in immunology.
You had doctors talking
with microbiologists
because they knew that
there was a there there,
but they hadn't
mapped it out yet.
So they began
doing this mapping,
and that's really
where it began.
And now look where we are.
We know that there are lymphatic
microvessels in the brain.
And we wouldn't have even
thought to look there, right?
It's all about world view.
So the psychoneuroimmunology
is bringing
us to understand the
deep interconnections
between the mind and the
body, and we're really
just beginning.
And in my view, we
haven't even begun
to uncover the role of
spirit in the process.
And really, psyche
is spirit, right?
So the truth of the
matter is, in the world
that we live in in science
and medicine, which
is fraught by an
overabundance of materialism,
these haven't been
safe questions to ask.
>>SUE: Yes.
Are there specific
things that you
could say are the components
that psychoneuroimmunology
is focusing on just so
that our viewers can
land this in the mind?
>>JAIN: Sure.
There's a lot of study looking
at the role of emotions
in health.
And so, again, because
of the just sort
of the zeitgeist of the way
things were, in the early days
there was a lot of focus
on negative emotions
and their role in
disease progression.
And so there's
still a lot of that
looking at the
role, for example,
of depression and heart disease
or cancer progression, stress,
all of that.
But what's also exciting
is in the past decade
or so there's a lot of research
into the facets of well-being
and its relationship
to health so.
That's really important.
And those like studies that
track people over time and see,
are those that have more
optimism or more purpose
more likely to live longer?
There are studies like that.
And then there are kind of
more controlled studies,
if you want to say
it that way, where
they look at the effects
of fostering happiness
in someone and the effects on
things like the common cold.
So it's really neat
because they're
starting to really deeply look
into how our state of being
affects the fluctuations,
the dynamic fluctuations
in our body.
>>SUE: Inside our system-- so
our immune system is related
to our emotional system, is
related to our consciousness,
and when they are
tied together, it
can generate a sense of
presence and well-being
that ultimately allows an
individual to actually function
on this earth the way they
were designed to function.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
>>SUE: Yeah?
Go figure.
>>JAIN: Absolutely great.
Yeah.
And when we bridge
psychoneuroimmunology tools
with the study of
what's often called
integrative medicine
or holistic medicine,
that's when we really
start to get deeper
into exploring what is the
role of presence and spirit
right into the process.
>>SUE: Was there an aha
moment in your world,
in your practice, in
working in your efforts
with people that turned
some lights on for you?
>>JAIN: Yeah, I mean, several.
But I'd say the first
one really that turned me
into I'd say a devout seeker of
understanding energy medicine
and its power in
fostering healing
was my own first experience
as a client where
I just hopped on a table and
experienced a Reiki session.
I had no idea what
was going to happen.
I'd always had a
really deep connection
with sound and vibration
because I grew up singing.
I've always loved to sing.
So I'm a singer.
So I knew about
the power of that,
and I explored the
power of mantra.
But I just couldn't
wrap my head around,
how could I study
this in a deep way
beyond just brain changes,
which was cool, but not
really what I was seeking.
I was seeking to understand
the nature of vibration.
And I remember being
on that Reiki table,
and all of a sudden I was
feeling all this energy
going through my body.
And I could notice
where the knots were
and how those knots were
connected to old belief systems
and thought patterns
and emotions that I had
and what needed to be released.
And I remember
the moment where I
had a conscious decision
in myself to say,
I'm letting go of this,
and the energy just flowed.
>>SUE: It just went.
>>JAIN: It just went.
And I thought-- of
course, my scientific mind
was like, this is really neat.
>>SUE: How'd I do that?
>>JAIN: I mean,
I just felt this.
I mean, this was
completely palpable.
I've never felt like this.
And there's such a
profound connection
here with the emotions
and the belief systems.
This has to be studiable.
So that's really where the light
went on in my mind and I said,
we've got to study this
on a scientific level.
It's so powerful.
It could help so many people.
>>SUE: And is it influencing
your profession overall?
>>JAIN: Yeah, I would say so.
I really do incorporate subtle
energy awareness in pretty much
all the teaching that I do, and
our collection of scientists,
who have had their own personal
experiences-- are also,
of course, deep
spiritual practitioners--
use that information as
well as the great privilege
that they've had to study
science to ask the deeper
questions now about healing.
>>SUE: It's so fascinating
because the power of the mind,
just letting go of
something, is what
allows this true
subtle energy or spirit
energy, invisible energy,
the real us, to flow.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
>>SUE: We realize that
the mind is very powerful,
but we think we're supposed
to think our way into healing
and wholeness.
But we can't because the
mind won't let that happen.
It's not made of wholeness.
It's only a part of us.
And so what you're
working with is--
and sharing from an
experiential level
for yourself is that the
greatest power your mind had
in that moment was to let go.
>>JAIN: Every
time, time and time
again-- every
transformative experience
that I have personally had
or that my clients have had
has been when the mind is
put in its rightful place
as the observer as
opposed to the driver.
>>SUE: A steward.
>>JAIN: A steward.
>>SUE: It has to be serving
something bigger than itself.
>>JAIN: That's right,
the steward of the soul.
And this is all,
of course, laid out
so well in the
ancient scriptures
where they say the mind is
like a lame rider and the vital
is a blind horse.
You must unite them together.
This is the practice of
yoga or union, right?
>>SUE: Yes, yes.
>>JAIN: To unite these
together properly
so that we can serve in a
greater capacity to spirit.
>>SUE: What an amazing time that
we're alive that we get to even
have this conversation, right?
>>JAIN: It's amazing, yeah.
>>SUE: It's such a blessing.
And I know that
all of our viewers
are watching because
they know it too,
and they know that it's time to
put the pieces back together.
They just don't know
quite how sometimes
because we weren't
raised in a culture that
was nurturing this.
And so I'm so grateful
for you bringing
every aspect of your perspective
to this conversation.
It's really fabulous.
>>JAIN: Thank you.
>>SUE: So speak to us
about the distinction
between healing and curing.
I'm on this with you.
I can't wait to hear what
you have to say about this.
>>JAIN: Thank you.
Yeah.
I have learned
everything about healing
from talking with letters,
and we're engaged in a process
right now at the Consciousness
and Healing Initiative
where we're reaching out to
a number of different healers
and asking them, what is
healing from your perspective?
And the common
thread-- as you know,
there are so many
different beautiful paths
towards healing.
There's protocols.
Some people use protocols.
Some see the body
as a unified field.
Others see it as
a layered field.
There's so many ways for us to
experience what we call energy.
But the common thread that I
have heard time and time again
from healers is
that healing is not
about getting rid of anything.
It's not about getting
rid of a disease.
It's not about seeing
something that's outside of me
and targeting it
and blowing it up,
which is almost the way that
medicine has kind of been
describing things for so long.
And it's really a very
incomplete model, even
within medicine.
>>SUE: Very separative.
>>JAIN: Separative-- and it just
doesn't work, quite frankly.
I mean, the more that we
learn about the connections
with the brain and the
gut and everything,
it's not about that.
>>SUE: It's a waste of our time.
>>JAIN: Yes.
It's just-- it's
incomplete at best, right?
And it's a fallacy at worst.
>>SUE: Yeah.
>>JAIN: So what healers
say is happening is really
a realignment--
again, a realignment with the
deepest parts of who we are,
a realignment with soul,
with spirit, with god
consciousness, with purpose.
And so their job is
to essentially help
clear the debris that
keeps us from being
in that place of union
with our soul and spirit.
And so in the process
of doing that,
the vital life force,
as you mentioned,
is uncovered because
we're clearing away
what some people would
say are karmic patterns.
Others would describe
it differently.
But in that clearing
away of sanskaras,
of belief systems,
all of these things,
we're able to reconnect the
mind with the vital force
and foster the healing
that is our birthright.
>>SUE: You speak about
some scars and karma
and an unresolvedness, a
sense of unresolvedness.
And I'd like for you
to just explain karma
as you're defining it-- again,
just so that everyone can be
following along here together.
>>JAIN: Yeah, absolutely.
The most simple way
to think about karma
is really our thoughts,
words, and deeds, our habits.
Now, in the Jain
tradition, karma
is considered a real thing.
It's a non-subtle matter.
It's interesting that
it's described that way,
but that's how it's described.
It's a very subtle
matter, actually,
that encases the soul.
And so in Jainism and
in many different--
Vedantic and other
traditions, they
describe the different
subtle bodies.
And the subtlest of all the
bodies is the karma sharir,
and it's really the karmic
body that encases the soul.
That's how it's described.
So you can take this as
figurative or literative.
But essentially what happens
is everything that we do,
everything that we say,
everything that we think,
every action that we
take creates a pattern.
It's an informational pattern.
So karma can be thought of
as an informational pattern.
And this informational
pattern, if we conceptualize it
as almost a cloud then encases
the soul, a dynamic cloud
that's constantly moving,
kind of encasing the light,
the pure light of the soul.
It then follows outward with
what we call the tejas sharir,
or the subtle body--
the fiery body,
as it's described in some
traditions, including Jainism--
to where everything that
we do, think, and say
is influenced by our
soul's consciousness
and is influencing us
dynamically in every moment.
So when an energy
healer says, I'm
working at the karmic level,
what I believe is going on
is that they're getting
really deep into the layers
of being able to move
informational patterns, which
we might call karma,
which then unleash
the light of the soul
more readily to foster
that continued movement and
potentially obliteration
of that habit pattern, of
that informational pattern.
>>SUE: So what I find
is that if the mind is
aware of conscious choice
in everything that we do,
an intentional choice about
everything that we think
and every action
that we take and what
we say, et cetera, that it
can turn this body of energies
into serving our entire
life experience here.
Is this aligned
with what you're--
>>JAIN: Absolutely.
Yeah, absolutely.
The mind's role is as an
observer and a servant,
not a master, not a master.
But if our minds are
being driven by our habit
patterns and our conditioning--
so the more we're slaves
to our conditioning--
we're growing up in
a dualistic world.
If we follow what the
Vedic scripture said,
then we are ultimately
non-dual and everything is one.
And the Lila that is at
hand, the divine dance,
is to be embodied forms of
consciousness and prakriti
and enjoy the gifts
that have been
given to us as
embodied souls and yet
find our way back to oneness.
So while we're going
through this dance,
we get to experience the
world, and the world affects us
through conditioning.
And so if the mind is a
servant to conditioning,
then we just continue to
live in that dual world,
and we don't get a
taste of the oneness.
>>SUE: Yes.
>>JAIN: So that's why--
>>SUE: When in reality, it's
here to act as practice ground
for us to learn how to find
the oneness in the face
of an invitation or a temptation
into this dualistic reality
that we're in.
Yes?
Does this align with--
>>JAIN: Exactly.
>>SUE: It's so beautiful.
>>JAIN: And we get to play.
We get to play.
We get to learn.
We get to evolve.
We get to see that I
am you, you are me.
We're no different.
All of the divisiveness
that we see is just a game.
It's just a game.
It's not real.
>>SUE: So how does the
recognition of that relate
to healing or curing--
this conversation that
we're having about healing
and curing.
How does what we're
talking about right now
relate to those definitions?
>>JAIN: Thank you.
It's a great question.
So if we can step out
of the conditioned mind
into a deeper sense of
oneness, then the vital
can connect properly
with the mind guided
through the soul's consciousness
to be fully aligned
and present.
So that brings us, of course,
often, feelings of well-being.
That's not why we
do it, but that's
what often happens because the
taste of our soul and spirit
often leads us to the
feelings of bliss.
That's why oneness
is often described
as [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] right?
>>SUE: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>>JAIN: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] is
the blissful part of ourselves.
And there we have the
alignment and the unblocking
of those mind patterns, the
conditioned mind patterns.
The unblocking happens so
that healing can happen.
And in the process of healing,
sometimes what we call curing
will happen where a
disease will move.
>>SUE: I know this
experientially myself.
I healed the
scoliosis in my body
because of this very action.
I had an awakening,
spent 10 years
of my life integrating that,
and healed migraine headaches
and a scoliosis.
But it wasn't because I set
out to heal those things.
It was because I was
obsessed with integrating
what I had awakened to,
bringing the mind and the body
and the spirit, the breath,
back together again.
So I know for a fact
that what you're saying
is absolutely where
we need to be living.
So I would love for
you to speak about this
from this idea of chronic
disease, chronic illness.
A person's been told
you're going to have
to learn to live with this.
This is the way it is.
There's no cure for this.
Based on the conversation
that we're having right now,
the idea of such a
prognosis seems ludicrous.
It seems like it's not
a vibrational match.
It doesn't resonate.
What can you say?
>>JAIN: It doesn't resonate,
and actually the data
don't support it either.
So we all know of the
disempowering models
that have been forced upon
so many of our patients,
including chronic
pain patients, again,
stemming from this
model of pathogenesis.
There is something outside of
me that is causing my suffering,
and I must numb myself
to the suffering
because that's the
only thing I can do.
So patients have
been taught, you
need to take this pain pill.
That's the only way we know
how to deal with your suffering
and your pain.
And they've been duped.
And now we see the pendulum
swinging on the other side
where it's like,
well, now doctors
are being treated as
gatekeepers and they
have to decide whether they
should give someone a pain pill
or not.
And meanwhile, the patient's
thinking, what do I do?
I've basically been told there's
nothing you can do for me.
I've been told that
the best thing I can do
is to numb my suffering.
And now I'm being told that
the medication that you're
giving me to numb
my suffering you're
no longer allowed
to give me, right?
It is a complete model
of disempowerment.
It's not true.
The data doesn't
even support it.
So here's what some of
the data does suggest.
We've conducted what we call
systematic reviews of energy
healing, what we call biofield
therapies in the science world,
right?
And the strongest
evidence for these energy
therapies, whether
the Reiki healing
touch, all kinds of different
modalities, is for pain.
OK, so energy therapies
help for pain.
The Joint Commission
of Physicians
and the National Institutes
of Health and others
have just come forth saying that
first-line treatments for pain
include acupuncture, to
a degree, mindfulness,
and other holistic therapies,
including cranial sacral,
chiropractic in some cases.
So these are being purported as
first-line treatments for pain.
And how do they work?
Again, they work with
stimulating the vital energy
system.
And that is about writing our
own ability to heal ourselves.
All of these holistic
practices are about
bringing us back to an
ability to heal ourselves.
And then we look at placebo--
again, completely fascinating.
And you probably know of
all of the data in placebo.
It's amazing.
But just for example, there
are now five open-label placebo
studies.
What does that mean?
When I say "placebo," what do
you think most people think
of, Sue, when I say "placebo?"
What are the words that
come to most people's minds
or even your own when you
hear the word "placebo?"
>>SUE: Made up, psychosomatic.
>>JAIN: Made up,
psychosomatic, fake, not real--
all of these things.
And here you've got five
studies that are saying,
here's a placebo.
I'm going to give you a placebo.
Placebo has actually been
shown to have profound effects
on the mind and body.
We've seen this in studies.
So you're going
to take a placebo.
I'm not going to
lie to you about it.
And we're going to
see if you get better.
Guess what?
They do.
>>SUE: They do.
>>JAIN: This has
been found for pain.
This has been found
for chronic fatigue
and for other
conditions as well.
We're just starting
to uncover this--
the researchers at Harvard that
just got a really nice sized
grant to look at this more
deeply in irritable bowel
syndrome patients.
So what is this telling us?
We really have to think about
what kind of belief systems
are being imposed on us, and
we have to own our own belief
systems first and foremost.
>>SUE: Yeah, we have to wake up.
Yes.
>>JAIN: Yeah, we own
our own belief systems.
If we can unblock ourselves
from thinking, I can't do it,
there's no hope, all of those
things-- once we can unblock,
that's the first step, right?
So what we call placebo,
elements, expectation,
all of that, they're
in science what
we call moderating factors.
We have to open that gate.
Once we open that
gate of belief,
we open our abilities to
really believe in healing
and believe in our
own, in a power
to foster what we want
to see in the world.
Everything changes, as you know.
>>SUE: It becomes a
different smorgasbord
of selecting our
focused intentionality,
recognizing that that alone is
what is doing the healing in so
many of these cases.
It's such a fascinating world.
So what kind of
patients come to you?
Who comes to you?
Who shows up in your world?
>>JAIN: You know,
everyone really.
I mean, these days I do
most of my teaching in kind
of large groups or workshops.
And so we get lots of folks.
We get folks that are
suffering from pain or mystery
illnesses a lot.
People come to us because
they have mystery illnesses
with people that are
just really struggling
with meaning and
purpose in their lives
and those that are
struggling from depression,
which, as you know, is such
a major issue in our world.
Over 300 million
people worldwide,
at least, suffer from
major depression.
And you might know that,
unfortunately, the US
is experiencing,
for the third year
in a row, lower life expectancy.
So our life
expectancy is actually
going down instead of up.
And the major drivers of
that are suicidality and drug
overdose.
>>SUE: What do you think
has happened in the largest
picture with the systems that
you're so deeply affluent in?
What has happened
with these people that
are landing in such a state of
disempowerment and depression
and pain cycles, et cetera?
What has happened
energetically with them
or from the biggest picture
perspective in your opinion?
>>JAIN: I think one
of the key things
is we're disconnected
from our bodies.
That's a big thing.
We live in the mind.
We're conditioned in the mind.
We are bombarded
with influences that
tell us that we're not
good enough, that we're not
smart enough, that we're
not rich enough, that all
of these things, that
we're not enough in all
of these different ways.
That's the core of so
much of our suffering.
>>SUE: It's so interesting
because we're made of spirit
and our journey is to come
here and be fully human.
But halfway here, we
interrupt the journey
and try to start going back
seeking spiritual orientation
and, as you're saying,
dropping into the body would
be be the solution.
And it makes perfect sense
because that's our destination.
We set out to come
into this body.
>>JAIN: That's right.
>>SUE: But we never really
make the journey completed,
and we suffer because of that.
>>JAIN: And I mean,
I'll just share
with you from my own
personal experience.
There were times that I really
questioned why I was in a body
because sometimes it can feel
really limiting in a body.
And I think it's really
after having children
that I really witnessed
the joy of having a body
and having two souls
in a body, and what
an amazing experience that is.
It really brought me
into a deep respect
for being a soul in
a body, first of all,
and what the magic
is of embodiment.
And then you have
these teachings
from spiritual masters like
Sri Aurobindo and the Mother
that are saying the
time is different now.
A lot of the way that
the Vedic scriptures have
been interpreted in the past
is about transcending the body.
Well, what does
that mean really?
They talked about
transcending the senses.
And so for a lot of traditions,
the way that was described
is shutting off almost, right?
But it's exactly the
opposite, actually.
It's completely opposite.
>>SUE: It's becoming all that
and more, not instead of,
but all this and more.
>>JAIN: All this and more--
and so the Mother talks
about the consciousness of
cells, which is also reflected
in Jain teachings as a
way of bringing spirits
so fully into the body
and into the earth
and into the physical reality
that we can transform it.
So that's the work
that's upon us, right?
That's the work that's upon us.
But it can be a
very joyful thing.
It doesn't have to be a long,
laborious, painful process,
you know?
>>SUE: So much to explore.
So let's say-- circle the
wagons here for a little bit.
Someone's watching.
They have chronic pain.
They're in a deep
depression cycle.
They want out of it.
Let's just drop in.
What's the first thing?
Let's just-- maybe it's a recap.
Maybe something
new comes to mind.
What do I do?
What's my first go-to?
I'm thinking suicidal thoughts.
I don't want to be here.
I can't make sense out of this.
I seem disempowered.
Where do I start?
What do I do right
now that's going
to allow me to know there's
something bigger at play here
and I too can tap into it?
It's for me too,
not just that select
few or the fortunate
ones or the illuminated.
How do I begin?
>>JAIN: Thank you.
OK, the first thing
that I would say--
and this might sound weird--
is that it's OK to suffer.
It's OK to suffer.
We almost want to just numb
ourselves from our suffering.
So we're human.
We all suffer in different ways.
But this is the other
truth that we know.
Deeply we know this
within ourselves.
It's of course been taught
in the spiritual traditions.
Nothing is permanent.
It's OK to suffer, but
nothing is permanent.
Not even our suffering
is permanent,
even though it
may feel that way.
And the biggest thing that
we can do to help ourselves
is recognize that we are
not our conditioned minds.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
So by recognizing that
we are spirit beings
and we're coming into this
body and there's suffering
associated with that--
let me just be clear that it
seems that what you're saying
is if we can come
present to the suffering,
then the suffering
will dissolve.
The experience is not something
that is overwhelming to us
when we can come present
to it and be with it,
that it starts to emerge this
mind-body union that we're
speaking about as an actual
part of the healing process.
So it's OK to suffer,
meaning embrace it.
Don't try to negate it.
And we become the creative
force that we really
are in this body on
this planet, and we
start to experience ourselves
as the presence that
is the healing.
>>JAIN: That is
absolutely right.
And as we embrace suffering
and we don't shy away from it,
we also open ourselves to
the totality of experience,
including joy.
So it's not that we have to
be suffering our whole lives.
But we just be present
with where it is,
and we'll notice that it shifts.
I mean, if we really start
to follow and track our pain,
we'll realize that, even though
we might think it's constant,
it's not.
It moves.
Everything moves.
As you know,
everything constantly
fluctuates in the body.
We are a dynamic field of
energy and information,
and we are always shifting.
So there's hope there
in knowing that I
can turn towards my suffering.
I can embrace it
lovingly and also
recognize it's going to move
just like everything moves.
>>SUE: Yes.
I know that, as well,
from experience,
that what you're saying
is absolutely true.
And as I would move
with the pain that
was happening in my
body and in my life,
it would evolve and
evolve, and that's
how this whole scoliosis
unwound itself.
That's how my own system began
to have a different reference
point for what mattered most.
And it was very liberating,
extraordinarily liberating.
>>JAIN: That's wonderful.
Yeah, and you
spoke of unwinding,
which is an
interesting term to use
because another just
kind of practice
that I find very useful
for just about everyone,
but including pain, depression,
or just when you're feeling
patterns of darkness,
is a technique
that I first learned from
my teacher Reverend Rosalyn
Bruyere and Ken
Weintraub, and they
called it unwinding meditation.
And so sometimes when we think
when we sit in meditation,
we have to be really still.
We keep this back
straight and all that.
And that's true.
We want to foster the
energy flow in the body.
But once we have a sense
of grounding and presence
in the body and we
feel the energy,
we can then allow the body
to just spontaneously,
literally unwind itself.
And so you may be guided for the
body to move in a certain way.
>>SUE: That's exactly
what was happening.
>>JAIN: Yes, isn't that amazing?
Because the body
knows what to do.
The vital force, when it's
driven by the soul's force--
>>SUE: And the mind is
allowing that to happen.
>>JAIN: And the
mind is opening--
>>SUE: Letting go.
>>JAIN: --and just holding
and just being the observer.
I'm just watching.
Whoa, I'm moving in all
these different ways.
OK, don't judge.
Just be here, watch it
move, and it's amazing.
These patterns, whether you want
to call the karmic patterns,
sanskaras, whatever
you want to call them,
they unwind themselves
naturally just
by holding that loving
presence and allowing the body
to freely move.
>>SUE: It's just so joyful
to hear your conversation.
I know that this is so,
so helpful for people.
And I know that
you've had experience
with some pretty serious
cases and clients.
Tell us about your process
with the cancer individuals
that you were working
with in particular.
>>JAIN: Absolutely.
It was really a gift to be
able to work these women.
And the inspiration
for it is, as you know,
Sue, fatigue is the
number one complaint
among breast cancer
patients, all cancer
patients and survivors.
So what some people
don't know is
that even after you're
done with treatment,
we do know now there's
new data suggesting
that if you go
through chemotherapy,
it does increase your
likelihood of feeling
fatigue, these sorts of things.
It's just we're dealing with
medicine as best we can.
There are some side effects.
That's just the way it is.
No judgment, no blame.
Everyone's doing
the best they can.
But there are side
effects, and we
have to figure out how to
mitigate those side effects
or even prevent them, right?
So we have so many people
after cancer treatment that
are suffering from
such debilitating
amounts of fatigue, including
brain fog, inability
to get up and move, inability
to just sort of function
in their everyday life
and do the things that
made them joyful--
exercise, whatever they are.
It's a huge problem, and there's
no gold standard treatment
for it.
And being a healing student
and a healing practitioner,
I thought, well, why
aren't we looking
at energy healing for this?
I mean, it seems like
a no-brainer, right?
Stimulate the vital
energy flow in the body.
These folks are depleted.
They've gone through so much.
So I went to Rosalyn and
I said, what would you
do for these patients?
If we were going to do a study,
a randomized controlled trial
looking at the effects of
this, what would you do?
And she said, chelation.
So what is chelation?
It's just a hands-on,
basic technique on the body
where you're stimulating
bone marrow chi
and you're drawing
toxicities away from the body
by fostering vital energy
flow through the body.
So we did a clinical trial.
And because I was
in academia at UCSD,
there's a lot of interest
in, well, is this placebo,
are these just placebo
effects, whatever.
So we did our placebo arm.
We had a group of
skeptical scientists
who mimic the hand positions
who were super nice.
We did all the
sessions in silence.
We had patients, no matter
whether they were in the energy
group or what we call the
touch-alone group, which
we said, hey, touch
fosters healing too.
So you guys are going to
get something no matter.
You're either going
to get energy healing
or you're going to get touch.
Both have been shown
to be effective
or you're going to get
a weightless control.
You'll get treatment later.
We're going to measure
you on all these things,
like fatigue, depression,
quality of life,
and cortisol variability,
which is the rhythm of cortisol
throughout the body.
So we're going to look at
all of these different things
and just see what happens.
Well, first of all, those
patients were so happy
that they were being
studied and that something
was being done to look at
treatments for fatigue--
that of itself
was an eye opener.
I had patients calling
me from Florida.
Here I was in
California saying, I'm
so happy you guys
are doing this study.
Can you tell me what
I can do for fatigue,
because my doctor wants to
give me an SSRI for depression
because he thinks that's
going to help my fatigue.
So that was kind of the
state of things, right?
So anyway, what did we find?
We found that the actual energy
healing not only dramatically
reduced fatigue.
Within a month, these
women had dropped
to levels of what you would find
for the normative population,
the person walking
down the street.
Their fatigue had
literally just plummeted.
They were able to
kind of function
in their everyday life.
They were happy.
Their brain fog had lifted.
Their quality of life had
improved, all these things.
But also, the rhythms of
cortisol in their body
improved.
Now, this is important
because rhythms of cortisol,
you might know, people think
of it as a stress hormone.
Everything follows a
rhythm in the body.
So usually cortisol peaks when
we wake up and then kind of
goes down during the body.
That's important
because it talks
to our inflammatory
immune system.
All these systems
in the body need
to be talking to
each other correctly.
For breast cancer
patients who are
experiencing
depression and fatigue,
that rhythm is altered.
It could be completely flat.
It could be wonky for
many different reasons.
What we found was a
normalization of that rhythm.
And that's super
important because it
seemed to be associated with
the reductions in fatigue
that they had.
So it's like, wow.
We'd love to be able to have
these kinds of practices
more readily integrated into
the hospital and into clinics.
And the good news is they are.
There are many academic centers
for integrative medicine
that are now incorporating some
of these biofilled therapies
into their suite of services.
So it's starting to happen.
But we've got to have more
studies like that so we
can take those
studies and we can
say to the heads of hospitals
or whatever, this is real.
This impacts people down to
not only the spiritual levels,
which are, I would say,
the most important,
but the psychological
and the physical levels.
And there's no side
effects to this treatment.
So once we do more studies
like this and, honestly,
we show more cost
effectiveness, the bottom line,
which is what matters
for hospitals a lot--
is it going to save me money?
Is it going to keep people
out of the hospital?
Is it going to really
keep them more well?
Then we'll get there, yeah.
>>SUE: So there were trained
energy healers and placebo
healers.
Tell us about placebo
a little more deeply.
Just speak to us.
>>JAIN: Sure.
And you can imagine,
a lot of the energy
healers that I talked to were
like, why are you guys doing
this, and why are you calling it
placebo, because energy moves.
And if you got a
healthy person--
and these were healthy people--
touching a person
who's not healthy,
energy's just going to flow
from them to the other person.
And in fact, we did
see some effects
on fatigue, which are important.
And that's just kind of
good common sense, right?
If you're laying down
on a table twice a week,
and you're being touched
by a benevolent person,
and energy flow happens,
you're going to get better.
But the trained energy
healers, actually,
because of their ability to
really focus and move energy,
did even better
than those people.
So what is placebo?
I mean, it's really
a fascinating topic.
And I would say we
have placebo all wrong,
the way we've
described it before.
It's based in a materialist
model of medicine that
says all medicine is
real if it's physical,
and only physical
medicine is real.
Therefore, placebo is not real.
It's fake, all these
things that we say.
But yet, it seems to point
to the abilities of the mind
and the body to heal itself.
So I have a framework that
I call placebo equals HEAL--
Holistic Elements That
Activate Life Force,
because that's really
what we're talking about.
We're talking about the power
of cultivating presence,
first and foremost.
So whether I'm a
healer, a physician,
whatever, the presence
that I come in with
is going to foster the presence
that's in that patient,
fostering presence in
that dyadic relationship.
Relationship is huge.
So that's another,
quote, "placebo" element.
We've seen time and
time again studies
that have shown
that not only how
friendly and affable the
doctor is to the patient
will influence the patient's
outcomes, including
immune system outcomes, but
how much the doctor believes
that their patient can get well
will influence their outcome.
So relationship is key.
>>SUE: Placebo
surgery-- speak to us.
>>JAIN: Placebo surgery, yeah.
So if all of this just sort
of sounds like a great theory,
then you might
wonder in practice,
how far does placebo go and
what does the data really say?
So we mentioned the
open-label placebo studies
of telling people they
could have a placebo
and how that fostered benefits.
But what a lot of people don't
know is that there have been,
I think, about 39
randomized controlled trials
that have examined the effects
of surgery compared to placebo.
And Wayne Jonas and colleagues
published a systematic review
compiling the data from
all of these studies.
I believe it was
published in 2015.
And what they found was for
nearly every type of surgery,
whether it was for gut or other
issues, placebo elements--
that is, the placebo surgery
accounted for almost 70%
of the effects in some cases--
really huge effects that were
basically found from placebo.
What does that mean?
This was a group of
people that were told they
were going to get the surgery.
They may have
gotten an incision.
They were put
through anesthesia.
So they were led to believe that
they actually got a physical
surgery, but they didn't.
And they weren't
told that initially.
So then their outcomes
were measured.
And so they responded up to
70% as well as the people
who got the actual surgery.
So again, we have it
all backwards, right?
It's not the physical
intervention as much
as it is our minds
and bodies that
first have to be set
to foster that healing.
And then the
physical medicine may
have an effect on top of that,
but it's not the main thing.
It's the adjunct, actually.
>>SUE: Yes.
Obviously if someone is told
they're having a surgery--
I read a report
about a gentleman
who wanted to play
basketball with his grandson,
had been chair ridden
for years, four years,
and decided to
have knee surgery--
went, had the incision--
it was a placebo surgery.
They made the incision,
opened the joint capsule,
wiggled things around a
little bit, closed it back up,
and put him through
rehab, typical rehab
after a standard
surgery of this nature,
and he was out
playing basketball
with his grandson in
a matter of weeks.
>>JAIN: Amazing, right?
>>SUE: And nothing had happened.
It was simply his mind believing
that that had taken place.
So we know that
what you're saying
is tapping the most
powerful tool that we have,
and that is the use of the mind.
When we're attached to the mind,
it gets harder to use the mind.
But when we unattach
from the mind
and realize that we
are this spirit being
here that has a mind,
everything begins
to change when we
use it for what
it is meant to be used for,
in service to this bigger,
bigger picture.
>>JAIN: It's so true.
>>SUE: So we know, of course,
that this is a very big topic.
Someone might be wondering,
what if I go in for a surgery
and they're going to do
this placebo surgery on me?
And I'm not interested in that.
And we have to acknowledge
that these people are
knowing that they're
participating
in something experimental.
And I know that the
case that I'm citing
is the gentleman knew
that he was going
to be going in for an
experimental type of procedure,
and he wasn't
giving the details,
but he was agreeing
to participate
in this new perspective.
So it isn't that people
have to start worrying about
if I'm signing up to--
>>JAIN: Get surgery.
>>SUE: --go and have a surgery,
are they really doing it
or are they not?
It's a little more controlled
than that, for sure.
>>JAIN: Yeah, very much so.
And these people are
knowing that they're
entering a clinical trial.
They may be actually
told, in some cases,
you may get a placebo
surgery or a real surgery
or they may be told, as in
the case of your colleague,
it's another
experimental procedure.
And then basically
every single time
that happens, eventually
they are told.
If they were in the placebo arm,
they're told that they were.
And then they're offered the
actual surgery if they want it.
>>SUE: If they still want it.
>>JAIN: Going in, they
have some idea that they're
going to be randomized.
>>SUE: They're participating
in research of some sort.
>>JAIN: Exactly.
They're chosen by
chance in that way.
>>SUE: All of which can still
play into the mind agreeing.
I may be getting
the actual surgery.
I may be getting a placebo.
It's up to me to
let it work for me.
So I'm surrendering,
and I'm all in,
and then we're given this
new data, which is just
fascinating for us to explore.
>>JAIN: It's really
interesting, actually,
because it reminds me of a
patient in our cancer fatigue
trial.
We had the same thing.
I mean, it wasn't as dramatic,
but we told our patients,
you're either going
to get touch alone
or you're going to
get energy healing
and we're not going to tell
you which one until after.
But if you did get
touch alone, we
have the ability, thanks
to some funding support,
to give you energy
healing sessions
after the study is over.
And so CNN actually did a
really great piece on one
of our patients, Linda,
who had this experience.
She first went through
the touch alone,
so she could talk about what was
that like just being touched,
and then what was the
difference for her afterwards
when she received
the energy healing?
And what she had to say
was pretty profound.
It was really interesting to
hear a patient's perspective
on what it's like to go through
a, quote, "placebo" and then
what it's like to
get, in our case
with the energy healing,
the actual healing itself.
>>SUE: Yes, fascinating.
>>JAIN: Yeah.
Shamini is the president
and CEO of the Consciousness
and Healing Initiative, or CHI.
Shamini formed this initiative
to create a diverse community
of healers and scientists.
Take a look.
>>DEAN RADIN: The reason
why an organization like CHI
is so important is because
it brings together people
from many disciplines that are
interested in mind and matter
as it is related to health.
>>RICHARD HAMMERSCHLAG: So we're
attracting young scientists
and old scientists retired,
scientists and people who've
done this kind of work in
the closet, if you like,
for a while.
We're bringing
consciousness and healing
studies out of the closet.
>> CHI is made up of some
of the most extraordinary
individuals--
top scientists in the field,
people at major universities,
clinicians like myself.
So when you put
together in a room
the best of science,
the best of practice,
and you begin to
start to translate
that science into practice,
we have nothing short
of a revolution,
really, that's going
to transform the way we think
about health and healing.
>>SUE: CHI, C-H-I--
what are these people?
Who are they that
are coming together?
Please tell us more.
>>JAIN: Yeah, thank you.
CHI is a wonderful
collaborative ,
and it's a growing
collaborative.
It's been my honor
to be its steward
over the past several
years, and it really
began with a shared vision
and a shared mission
to ignite healing
in all of humanity
and to help lead humanity
to heal ourselves.
And so what we've
done is we've just
been an attractor for
top-notch scientists
who are really willing
to ask the deeper
questions around
consciousness and healing
and collaborate with healers all
around the globe who are also
completely dedicated to
the exploration of healing,
including from the scientific
level as well as the practice
levels.
We also unite different
stakeholders in the process.
So for example, partners
include the Institute
of Noetic Sciences, the Chopra
Foundation, Miracle Foundation,
and so many others that are
coming together and saying,
here's what we have to offer.
So it's a way for us to
begin to collect our wisdom,
share our wisdom.
We have public events that
we do, educational events,
webinars on healing
where we bring the latest
science and practice of healing
to the community at large.
But we're also fostering
trust and collaboration
among the scientists,
especially those that are
placed in major universities.
And we've been really
blessed and fortunate to be
working with top-notch
researchers in the field.
And these researchers,
I should add ,
are really well-seasoned
researchers who get millions
of dollars in NIH grants
for their mainstream work.
So as I was going through
my process of doing
this clinical trial,
I started meeting
all of these other
amazing scientists
that were covertly, almost,
doing this research in healing,
or if they weren't
covert about it,
they really didn't
have funding for it
because the NIH would not
fund this kind of work.
They had trouble
publishing their data
because the reviewers
just couldn't
believe that such a thing
as energy healing was real.
I mean, I even had scientific
colleagues literally
write letters to the
editor and say, look,
you know that if I sent
you this exact same paper
and it was a drug,
you would have
no problem publishing this.
But because it's on
therapeutic touch
and even though it's a
well-controlled trial
with therapeutic touch,
mock therapeutic touch,
looking at the effects
in bone and tissue cells,
you're having trouble with this.
So we realized that we needed
to create a safe, trusted space
for scientists to be able to
talk to each other about this
so that we could move
the field forward
collaboratively and create
that trusted, safe space for us
to explore.
So CHI really started with
that, and it's just grown
tremendously into fostering
what we call trans-disciplinary
collaborations-- that
is, multiple perspectives
on healing--
designing studies,
executing studies
to look at different
types of healing,
including hands-on
healing approaches
all the way to distant
healing approaches, the power
of meditation as a
collective, looking
at how our biofields
might synchronize
when we meditate together,
these sorts of things.
>>SUE: You know, I was
raised in a family.
My father was a pioneer
in energy medicine.
It is so wonderful to see
that these are the topics
that our collaborators are
focusing on at this time
because 40 years ago this would
not have been a conversation.
It's so exciting to
be witnessing humanity
realizing we have to study
our way back together
again in a new way with
all of our new education
that's been made available to
us through the advancements
in our technology, et cetera.
>>JAIN: Yeah, it's true.
And I'd say we're
just beginning,
and there's a lot of work that
we need to do to sort of bridge
with the larger community
of science and medicine.
It's still very much considered
fringe, I'm not going to lie.
It's still very hard for
people to publish papers.
And yet, we have
groundbreaking studies
that are coming out
every year, sometimes
every couple of months.
One that just comes to mind
that people should know about--
I don't understand why
this isn't front-page news
everywhere--
is a study that our
colleague Lorenzo
Cohen, who is the director
for Integrative Medicine
Research at MD
Anderson Cancer Center,
has just done with
healer Sean Harribance.
And I happen to know
that they were working
on the study for quite a while.
And we could tell
lots of stories
about just what
is it like to have
these healer-scientists
collaborations?
There's a lot of
work that has to be
done to foster the right
protocols, build the trust.
There's a tremendous amount that
goes into these studies, not
just conducting them.
There's a lot.
Anyway, what they found was that
bioenergy, emitted bioenergy,
as from Sean Harribance
in particular,
this particular healer,
was able to shrink tumors
in a mouse model of cancer.
And they looked
at immune markers.
They looked at all kinds of
different inflammatory immune
markers and other
markers to start
to explore, how does
this work, because we
hear healers talking
about shrinking tumors
all the time, right?
But if you went and gave
that paper to your typical MD
or doctor, they're going
to look at it and say,
I have a really
hard time believing
this is true even
though it's published
and I know this is
a solid scientist.
So that's kind of why we
are fostering research
at many different labs.
So it's not going to come out
of just one institute or one
lab or one university.
We really need a preponderance
of data for people
to look at this and say, wow,
this is really a there, there.
Wow, we really need to be
looking at this more deeply.
How does this work?
So part of it is making it safe
for scientists, like Lorenzo
and others, to come out of
the closet and do the work,
and there's safety in
numbers, quite frankly,
because people get attacked,
I'm not going to lie.
People do.
>>SUE: You bet.
Absolutely.
And, you know, time is on
our side because what we know
is humanity is waking up, and
we are no longer satisfied
with the ways that we've
been taught and been
led into the approaches
that perhaps were well
intended along the way years
ago and even cutting edge
at the time.
But we're outgrowing our
model of approach to healing.
>>JAIN: We have to.
>>SUE: And so time
is on our side.
Eventually there will
be enough of this
that it is too much to
ignore, too much to suppress.
And I agree, that as we come
from this grand neutrality
of a lot of different
research projects
coming forth for just
the information itself,
we know that it's
going to birth itself
right into the mainstream
at some point in time.
>>JAIN: Yes, it will.
>>SUE: It's exciting.
>>JAIN: Yeah, and so
we're playing our role
as the catalyst, the
collaborative accelerator
to have this happen
sooner than later.
>>SUE: Yeah, do our part.
>>JAIN: Yes.
>>SUE: Biofield energy is
one of the cornerstones
of research within the
Consciousness and Healing
Initiative.
Take a look at what a CHI
member has to say about it.
>>PAUL MILLS: One area that
the Consciousness Healing
Initiative has been
focusing on is the biofield.
And as far as what
exactly is the biofield
from my point of view,
it's an energy field
that surrounds and
permeates the body.
If we can reliably
measure the connections
between consciousness, between
the biofield and our health,
then that to me as a
game changer in science,
and it's a game
changer in medicine.
>>SUE: Tell us
about the biofield.
>>JAIN: It's the new term for
a very old concept, right?
>>SUE: Yes, yes.
>>JAIN: And honestly, scientists
can argue about this all day
long.
We love to talk about
terms and concepts.
But what we've
kind of landed on,
describing what
the biofield is, is
a set of interacting and
inner-penetrating fields
of energy and information
that guide our health.
It's really that simple.
>>SUE: OK, let's say that again.
>>JAIN: Sure.
>>SUE: Interactive.
>>JAIN: A set of interactive
and inner-penetrating fields
of energy and information
that guide our health.
>>SUE: So different layers
of frequencies of energy
that are interactive and
all collectively having
an influence on our health.
>>JAIN: Exactly.
So Sue, the biofield,
as you know,
is a term that we've made to
be as inclusive as possible
at this point, because
the truth of the matter
is, from a scientific
point of view,
we've just scratched the surface
of understanding how healing
works, right?
So the biofield is meant to
be this inclusive term that
allows us to explore both
those aspects of energy
and information
that are measurable.
And what are we talking about?
We're talking about
things like EKG and EEG
that we know we can
measure off of the body
and it tells us something about
our state of health, right?
We can look at pulsed
electromagnetic field
stimulation.
We have a sense of
the signal that's
being put in that is at
least somewhat measurable
or some aspect of it
is measurable, right?
And it's fostering
healing in someone.
So there's those
aspects of the biofield,
and then there's the
subtle energy aspect
that has been known and
worked with for millennia
to foster healing, the
vital life force, the things
that still kind of defy
outward measurement today.
We have our own inner
measurement of it.
We can feel energy flow
through our bodies.
Practitioners feel the energy
flow through our bodies.
Not so easy to measure directly.
Maybe we'll never measure
it directly, and that's OK,
but we can measure its effects.
>>SUE: Or maybe it's just that
technology hasn't caught up
yet--
>>JAIN: That's right.
>>SUE: --to what is true.
At one point, the Earth was
flat until we recognized
that there was something new--
perceivable.
And what if it's completely
there and absolutely
measurable?
We just have to
wake up on the level
of developing the technology to
measure exactly such a thing.
>>JAIN: Exactly.
You know, it's making
me think of something
that one of our
research directors,
Dr. Richard
Hammerschlage, says, which
is we were in the terms of
radio and then TV and Wi-Fi,
and we're going to
move toward the Bi-Fi.
So imagine that we have a
Bi-Fi detector, something
that is able to measure the
shifts in our energy system
and detect disease
before it manifests
in the physical system.
That's a huge game changer.
That will not only
help people understand
that we are bioelectromagnetic
beings and beyond, that we
are vibrating beings,
but it will help medicine
to understand,
how do we use this
to foster health and
healing, prevent disease
before it starts?
And we've talked to-- everyone
wants this technology.
It's going to happen.
It is going to happen.
We have healers that want it.
They say, I want to be able
to show to my patients who
don't see the energy field or
necessarily feel energy what's
happening to them
in their bodies
when they're getting
work done, right?
>>SUE: Yes.
>>JAIN: So imagine
how revolutionary
this technology's going to be,
and we will work towards it.
We are already working.
There's definitely
great strides that
have been made by folks
in Russia and other places
to start developing
technology around this.
There is a tremendous amount of
research that needs to be done.
There's probably different
aspects of the biofield
that we're going to measure
that are going to tell us
different things,
including sound, light,
all kinds of
different ways that we
can measure the emanations
or the reflections
of the emanations of the
subtle into the physical.
It's really fun.
I mean, it's--
>>SUE: Yes.
And just because
we can't measure
it yet doesn't mean that
it isn't not only there,
but a completely valuable
thing for us to start
to have a relationship
between this field of energy
and the mind and its ability to
perceive it and work with it.
So in the meantime, while we're
waiting for technology to catch
up to what we know
is possible, is true,
what can our viewers
begin to sense
and feel within themselves?
What kind of modality that
is inherent within our system
might one be able to turn
their attention to utilize this
to their advantage?
>>JAIN: Absolutely.
So we rely on inner technologies
and our outer technologies
just to reflect
the ability for us
to engage in inner technologies.
That's really what it is.
So we have such an
amazing plethora
of practices to foster our own
healing from inner technology.
And I suggest that people go
to what gravitates to you.
Yoga is a complete system
of fostering healing
inside and out.
Patanjali's Eight Limbs of
Yoga lays it out very clearly--
so yam, which is the moral
code of ethics, Niyam,
what are habits, Asana, which
are seats of awareness or how
people think of yoga now
as just the practices,
the physical postures,
which is one part of it--
very important, but
not the only part--
Pranayam, which is the
movement and awareness
of vital energy, which so
many of us are teaching.
>>SUE: And the breath-- yes.
>>JAIN: Pratyhara, which is
allowing ourselves to engage
on the inner, explore the
inner planes, quiet ourselves--
allow the mind to quiet
so that we can then engage
in concentrated focus--
Dharan, which can be
single pointedness
on a mantra or the
breath, for example,
coming in and out of the
nose, many different ways.
So we go through all of these
different processes to then
open to Dhyan or many-pointed
awareness, basically,
the ability to really--
again, now you're really--
the mind is in service to the
spirit because it's aware.
It's not necessarily narrowed
by the emotions or other things.
>>SUE: It's not writing stories.
It's available.
It's focused here
in this inner realm
where healing
actually takes place.
>>JAIN: So we go
through all of this.
And as the mind is
able to open to that,
we then can experience
Samadhi states or states
of unity and bliss, right?
So yoga is a beautiful practice.
Qigong is another.
Meditation is another.
Many different forms--
I've experienced many
different forms of meditation
and found value in all of them.
It just really-- people
have to pick a practice that
resonates with them.
But they all point back
toward, as you know, Sue,
so well, cultivating
an inner awareness
of the inner landscape and
grounding into the body
is the single most important
practice that we can do today,
however we do that, whether it's
through even exercise, movement
in nature, getting into our root
chakra, getting into our legs,
dancing.
There's so many different
ways to get into the body.
>>SUE: With joyful loving
presence in the meantime.
>>JAIN: Yes.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
Shamini, how can
people find you?
Where can they learn more
about what you're sharing?
>>JAIN: Sure.
Well, I invite people
to go to our website.
We have all kinds of wonderful
offerings all the time.
So we share the science, but
we also shared the practice.
We have workshops with
healers and scientists
who come together to teach
what we know about healing
and foster healing in others.
All that information can
be found on our website,
which is www.chi--
or chi-- .is.
So chi.is is our
nonprofit's website.
You can also find me
on shaminijain.com,
and I'll share kind of all
of the different workshops
and things that I'm
doing on that site.
I'm also writing a book
for Sounds True, which
will be out in late 2020,
most likely, on the biofield
and the healing revolution.
So I look forward to sharing--
>>SUE: Do you have a title for
that book that we can look for?
>>JAIN: We're still
working on the title.
I like "The Healing Revolution.
>>SUE: We'll have
you back on the show
when it's time for everyone
to know about that.
>>JAIN: Great.
>>SUE: Shamini, you are
a brilliant, bright light
in our world.
Thank you so much
for what you're
doing, what your interest
is, and thank you
for following your
childhood curiosities
into an amazing, sophisticated,
intelligent approach
to integrating humanity's
approach to healing
back together again.
That's what it takes, and
you're a living example
of exactly how we need to be
living our lives in this way.
>>JAIN: Oh, thank you, Sue.
>>SUE: Thank you so
much for being here--
>>JAIN: Thank you so
much for having me.
>>SUE: --with us today.
>>JAIN: Thank you.
>>SUE: Yeah.
Dr. Shamini Jain
and CHI are changing
the direction of medicine.
This community of
scientists and healers
seek to evolve how we
approach alternative medicine
and healing practices.
I am Dr. Sue Morter.
Thank you for watching
"Healing Matrix."
[MUSIC PLAYING]